---
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: Is four enough?
description: ""
date: 2023-12-03T05:00:00.000Z
featuredImage: /images/uploads/heroKnight.webp
---

Tim Ferris' Four Hour Work week is a staple of digital nomad / hustle culture. In short this book paints a dream of working four hours a week and living anywhere by leveraging technology. Whether this is a feasible dream is dependant on circumstances and is a question for another day. The more interesting question is, whether it is a dream worth striving for.

To understand why one would want to work only 4 hours a week, you must start why work at all. Why do men devote 30, 40, or even 60 hours of every week to work? Ferriss would answer that it is to create enough wealth to live a fulfilling lifestyle. But this is not the pure reason why most men work. All work to provide for themselves, but why they choose a particular business or job ( occupation for short) is dependant on a number of factors outside amassing the most money. Some devote themselves to their occupation because they can't imagine anything better to do. These are the passionate workers, and those who think themselves passionate. Some devote themselves to an occupation for the dream of attaining financial freedom for themselves and smoothing the way for the children. But the vast majority devote themselves to their occupation because they must and are either lacking the ability or will to change their position.

But why in fact should we work? Why do we, must we, chase that dollar. Indeed, at a deep level the reason why we work should be tied to the over all aim of our existence. NFrom a Catholic persective this would be "To know, love, and serve God, and be happy with Him Heaven," so why one works should be something like this: "to occupy ones time in a way most conducive to loving and serving God, and acquiring the money needed for life." Let's dig into the first proposition - how to optimally occupy ones time - on the physical, mental and spiritual level.

To start with the lowest stakes, what is the ideal occupation on the physical plane? Likely not as sedentary as yours :P. But in all seriousness, the ideal occupation for physical health should enable moderate physical exercise. This in means that either the job is physical or leaves ample oppurtunity to exercise outside of work. Besides exercise it should be noted that, ideally, at least in the physical sense, one should be exposed to the minimum of workplace hazards, from dangerous chemicals to the boss's dog. Thus the "ideal" for physical health is fairly straightforward, and likely your occupation doesn't quite fit this definition. But enough, lets move to the mental plane.

Would you you lose your mind on the four hour work week? Maybe four hour weeks seem like mental bliss, but after you've caught up on sleep, cleaned your room for the thousandth time and put in your hour of work how would you spend your day? Would you enjoy your new life, or would you be left board and digusted by the uselessness of your free time? How would you replace the social and mental stimulus of work life? Discipline and creativity can find ways to replace the discipline and "fulfillment" work brings, but if you've ever spent time unemployed, the reality of extended free time rarely lives up to our dreams of it. Indeed it is nearly impossible to maintain sanity without some sort of outside commitment. So how one can embrace the four hour work week and and avoid mental decay? Only through serious discipline and commitment to some voluntary work or study that can replace that stimulus necessary work gives. This is not impossible, but requires serious effort to make the stop the dream of freedom from work from turning into the nightmare of a mentally meaningless life.

Finally, is four hours enough for the human spirit? To phrase this from a Christian perspective, can one grow closer to Christ and follow the example of Him and His holy people by working four hours a week? The short answer is "no". If we wish to follow strictly example of the Christ and his family on earth we would certainly have to devote ourselves to physical work. But apply their example more broadly and you might leave the four hour week door open. Most of us are meant to devote our time and energy to the betterement of ourselves, our families, and our neighbour, if not out of necessity, then out of charity. As the history of Christian mystics testifies, there are excetptions, who like Mary Magdalen have "chosen the better part", and devote their lives to ascetisim and prayer. But to counsel on choosing that occupation is far beyond this lay writer. If we do not have that calling at this time, it falls to us to devote our time to the active service of God, our families, and our neighbours. This does leave the door open to the four hour work week but with the caveat that those hours freed from creating income should be largely devoted to the service. Indeed this conclusion falls within Ferris' own ideas of a four hour work week. In his book he devotes a whole chapter to using financial and time freedom to serve others. However Ferriss' non-religious mindset is balanced to heavily toward experiencing the world than toward serving others and seems to leave God out of it entirely.

Having toured the physical, mental and spiritual dimensions of the four hour work week, we are left only with the issue of time. How can a four hour work week be sustainble for families through time? Or to put it more precisely, is it possible to provide the example and mentorship that children need to become responsible and hard working without working yourself? The obvious danger in this scenario is that children will not have the example of a parent who spends their days providing for the family, and they'll end up being spoiled brats and can't take care of themselves in the real world. The solution to this very real threat is twofold. As mentioned above the parents, especially the father must devote a signficant amount of their energy to the service of God and their neighbour. This can fill the gap the children would be missing in not having parents working 40 hour weeks. The second element is perhaps more important. It is vital that the children understand very clearly that as adults their own quality of life will be directly correlated to their ability to maintain it -- being trust fund babies can't be an options. Necessity is the mother of invention and this understanding will help them gain a sense of initiative.

In closing what are we left with? Feriss is on the the right path with his four hour week, but his conclusions need caveats. This is a nuanced, and perhaps lukewarm take, but the correct one. Like many things in life this it is a complex subject where simple principles ( why are do we work ) meet with the complexity of the real world. Aside from the question of feasibility, the four work week is a worthy goal. But only, if it is embarked upon with a great deal of care to avoid the mental, spiritual, generational lethargy that can so easily crop up in a lifestyle where there is much oppurtunity for leisure time.